ARROW-18345: [R] Create a CRAN-specific packaging checklist that lives in the R package directory (#14678)
apache/arrow: r/PACKAGING.md

  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)
- [ ] Open a draft pull request to modify the 
  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Open a draft pull request to modify the
  [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
  to reflect changes in
  [ci/PKGBUILD](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/ci/scripts/PKGBUILD),
  uncommenting the line that says "uncomment to test the rc".

Prepare and check the .tar.gz that will be released to CRAN.

- [ ] `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rcXX`
- [ ] `make build` (copies Arrow C++ into tools/cpp, prunes some unnecessary
  components, and runs `R CMD build`)

> - [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Linux

Reviewer: Are these necessary? This isn't something we've done before. The release-verification crossbow job could do these. But we generally don't care about source builds on win/mac, and Linux is covered in regular CI.

- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Windows
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on MacOS
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on MacOS M1
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Linux

> - [ ] `rhub::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz", platform=c("debian-gcc-patched", "fedora-clang-devel"))`

Reviewer: Unfortunately I think you have to rely on our CI for these. The rhub jobs will time out and fail.

- [ ] Run reverse dependency checks

Wait for the official release...
  
- [ ] Wait for the release vote to pass

> - [ ] Create a CRAN-release branch (TODO: previously this branch was on

Reviewer: Do this earlier because we always remove badges from README before submitting. You'll want to run urlchecker after removing badges.

  Neal's fork but we may want to consider a branch elsewhere)

> - [ ] Bump the Version in DESCRIPTION to X.X.X

Reviewer: The release prep script does this automatically, this is not a manual step.

> - [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.tz (via `make release`?)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz (via `make release`?)
```

Finalize and merge draft PRs/ensure linux binary packages are available:

> - [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core

Reviewer: Lately Jeroen has been merging these before the vote closes if it looks like the RC will pass. The binaries are versioned now so it is safe for him to deploy them whenever. That means you can test win-builder and macbuilder before the vote closes and include that as part of manual release verification. 

If they are merged before the vote passes, you still want to follow up to switch off of the RC URL, but that can happen in a separate PR after the fact.

- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core
- [ ] PR into autobrew/scripts
- [ ] PR into r-windows/rtools-packages
- [ ] Ensure linux binaries are available in the artifactory:
  https://apache.jfrog.io/ui/repos/tree/General/arrow/r

Check binary Arrow C++ distributions specific to the R package:

> - [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [WinBuilder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx)

Reviewer: Keeping their inconsistent naming scheme:

```suggestion
- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx)
```

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Packaging checklist for CRAN release

> For full documentation of the steps in this checklist, see the

Reviewer 2: Please can we rephrase this? What is "full documentation"? Do I need to have read it before I do this, or not? Let's make it explicitly clear what the role of each is.

[Apache Arrow Release Management Guide](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/developers/release.html#post-release-tasks).

- [ ] When a release candidate is created
  [Create a GitHub issue](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/new/)
  entitled `[R] CRAN release version X.X.X` and copy this checklist to the issue
  
- [ ] Confirm that all

>   [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org) are passing.

Reviewer 2: Should this say to confirm that the nightlies and packaging builds **at time of RC being cut** were passing?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 R-related [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org) from immediately before the RC was cut are passing.
```

That makes sense.  If we're only checking the R-related builds, could we update the text here to say that instead, so we're not making more work for ourselves if that's what we were doing before anyway?

> - [ ] Check [current CRAN check results](https://cran.rstudio.org/web/checks/check_results_arrow.html)

Reviewer 2: Check them for what?  Some have notes, some have errors. How do I interpret this?

Reviewer 2: What CRAN release branch?

Reviewer 2: Why did we need to pick that commit there? Shouldn't it already be on that branch given it was merged before the RC was cut?

Reviewer 2: Ah wait, patch releases originate from the initial release branch? We should document the difference in expectations here, I didn't know that.  In that case, I should expect that this commit is *not* in the branch as this is a patch release, right?

I just checked the history for the 10.0.1 commit and it is there. Isn't the manual selection of which tickets go into a patch release already sorted (i.e. by Jacob/Raul) by the time we deal with the branch? So only if we wanted to release 10.0.1.1(i.e. some R-specific things) that we'd need to worry about that.

Reviewer 3: > Isn't the manual selection of which tickets go into a patch release already sorted (i.e. by Jacob/Raul) by the time we deal with the branch

Correct, as long as the fix-version (or in the future gh milestone) is set correctly the commits will be cherry picked into the (patch) release branch.

> - [ ] Check [current CRAN check results](https://cran.rstudio.org/web/checks/check_results_arrow.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Check [current CRAN check results](https://cran.rstudio.org/web/checks/check_results_arrow.html) and ensure any ERRORs and WARNINGs from the last release have been fixed
```
Perhaps this? I'm confused, I thought things wouldn't have made it onto CRAN with ERROR/WARNING things in there?

Reviewer 2: Aha, I see!  So, in this case the ERRORs are from the `lubridate::qy()` update, so we're good for this one.  Thanks for the context there @assignUser

- [ ] Ensure the contents of the README is accurate

> - [ ] `urlchecker::url_check()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory, at the release commit
```

  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Packaging checklist for CRAN release

For a high-level overview of the release process see the
[Apache Arrow Release Management Guide](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/developers/release.html#post-release-tasks).

- [ ] When a release candidate is created
  [Create a GitHub issue](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/new/)
  entitled `[R] CRAN release version X.X.X` and copy this checklist to the issue
  

> - [ ] Evaluate the status of any failing
>   [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org): these are run
>   against the master branch and not the release branch, so the results may be
>   slightly out of date. After the CRAN-specific release branch has been created,
>   we can run any or all tests again using a GitHub PR and crossbow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I'm confused by this step - is this a new additional step?  It's not release verification, as that's something else.  Kou later made https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/14654 which basically does everything we need to do in this step.  We need more info here.

  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify the 
  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Pull request to modify the
  [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
  to reflect changes in
  [ci/PKGBUILD](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/ci/scripts/PKGBUILD),
  uncommenting the line that says "uncomment to test the rc".

Prepare and check the .tar.gz that will be released to CRAN.

- [ ] `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rcXX`
- [ ] `make build` (copies Arrow C++ into tools/cpp, prunes some unnecessary
  components, and runs `R CMD build`)
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally

> - [ ] Run reverse dependency checks

Reviewer 2: How?

Reviewer 3: I have removed the crossbow job because it would have been a bunch of work to fix the timeout. But I was wondering why revdepcheck was taking SO LONG (even if you take the 2 core gha machines into account). And locally it will still timeout for a different reason ({targets} timesout with multiple workers??).

But I  would be fine with reworking the job to use your gist or even the build in function I did not know exists: https://www.r-bloggers.com/2019/04/checking-reverse-dependencies-the-tiny-way/ current docs: https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-patched/library/tools/html/check_packages_in_dir.html

Reviewer 2: Doing it locally is a pain as I'm having to install a whole load of system libraries I don't need, to be able to run the gist; please can we rework the crossbow job?

- [ ] Open a draft pull request to modify 
  [the apache-arrow-static autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow-static.rb) 
  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)
- [ ] Open a draft pull request to modify the 
  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Open a draft pull request to modify the
  [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
  to reflect changes in
  [ci/PKGBUILD](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/ci/scripts/PKGBUILD),
  uncommenting the line that says "uncomment to test the rc".

Prepare and check the .tar.gz that will be released to CRAN:

> TODO: The packaging guide says `make release` but isn't there also a step where

Reviewer 3: That would be `make sync-cpp` but that happens within `make release` :)

we bundle Arrow C++ into tools/cpp and prune it so that the .tar.gz stays under 5 MB?

- `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rc0`
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Linux
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Windows
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on MacOS
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on MacOS M1
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally on Linux
- [ ] `rhub::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz", platform=c("debian-gcc-patched", "fedora-clang-devel"))`
  (TODO: as I understand it, we can't do rhub Windows and Mac checks because those
  would require the PRs into autobrew/rtools-packages to be finalized? Or maybe
  these already know about/use the nightly binaries?)

> - [ ] Run reverse dependency checks locally (TODO: document how to do this

Reviewer 3: We have a docker compose service for this now: `archery docker r-revdepcheck` (which is not documented I think :grin: )

  since we can't just use `revdepcheck`)

After this step, we need an official release:
  
- [ ] Wait for the release vote to pass

TODO is this where we create a CRAN release branch where the minor CRAN-specific

> fixes get picked from master? What is the git incantation for that?

Reviewer 3: This was usually done in a fork afaik but I think we should not do that if possible. One of the things that always happened was removing the badges from the README as the links were sometimes flakey and causing issues. We should just add that (should be doable with a bit of `sed`) to `make release`

- [ ] Bump the Version in DESCRIPTION to X.X.X
- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.tz (via `make release`?)

Finalize and merge draft PRs/ensure linux binary packages are available:

- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core
- [ ] PR into autobrew/scripts
- [ ] PR into r-windows/rtools-packages

> - [ ] Ensure linux binaries are available (TODO: maybe document where these live?

Reviewer 3: They are now uploaded to the apache artifactory during the release process https://apache.jfrog.io/ui/repos/tree/General/arrow/r

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Packaging checklist for CRAN release

For a high-level overview of the release process see the
[Apache Arrow Release Management Guide](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/developers/release.html#post-release-tasks).

Before the release candidate is cut:

- [ ] [Create a GitHub issue](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/new/)
  entitled `[R] CRAN packaging checklist for version X.X.X`
  and copy this checklist to the issue.
- [ ] Evaluate the status of any failing
  [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org). These checks
  replicate most of the checks that CRAN runs, so we need them all to be passing
  or to understand that the failures may (though won't necessarily) result in a rejection from CRAN.
- [ ] Check [current CRAN check results](https://cran.rstudio.org/web/checks/check_results_arrow.html)

> - [ ] Ensure the contents of the README is accurate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Ensure the contents of the README are accurate
```

- [ ] Release candidate!

Make pull requests into the [autobrew](https://github.com/autobrew) and
[rtools-packages](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages) repositories
used by the configure script on MacOS and Windows. These pull requests will
use the release candidate as the source.

- [ ] Pull request to modify 
  [the apache-arrow autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/high-sierra/Formula/apache-arrow.rb) 
  to update the release version, SHA256 checksum of the release source file, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify
  [the apache-arrow-static autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow-static.rb)
  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)

> - [ ] Pull request to modify the 

Reviewer: Might be good to note that there often are no changes in this script, and that's ok.

  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Pull request to modify the
  [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
  to reflect changes in
  [ci/PKGBUILD](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/ci/scripts/PKGBUILD),
  uncommenting the line that says "uncomment to test the rc".

Prepare and check the .tar.gz that will be released to CRAN.

- [ ] `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rcXX && git clean -f -d`

> - [ ] Unset the `ARROW_HOME` environment variable and then run `make build` (copies Arrow C++ into tools/cpp, prunes some unnecessary components, and runs `R CMD build`)

Reviewer: Why unset `ARROW_HOME`? (I've never done this.)

Reviewer 2: When I tried it earlier, when I ran `make build` it used the version of libarrow from `ARROW_HOME`, which wasn't the one I wanted it to use.

Reviewer: "Used" as in used to build against in order to build the vignettes? Generally that will be useful because it will save you time, as long as your local build is up to date. But that doesn't affect what cpp source gets copied into the R package.

Reviewer 2: I tried it again and had to unset it as the version of Arrow I have in `ARROW_HOME` is from the tip of the master branch and not from this one, and they've diverged significantly enough (the C++ backpressure PR is what did it I think) so I couldn't use that one even if it's just for building vignettes, as the R package won't build against it.

> - [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally

Reviewer 2: Is all of this necessary?  Surely we've run `devtools::check()` on one of our many many CI jobs?

Reviewer 2: (and we do it again later anyway)

Reviewer 2: :joy:

Reviewer 2: Yes it is necessary, or yes we've run it on CI so it's not necessary?

Reviewer 2: Urgh, keep having the problem that your comments are not showing up until after I've replied to a previous one, making this conversation weirdly disjointed, I just saw "YES" and "YES" before I added a laugh and my question.

OK, cool, leave it in.

> - [ ] `devtools::check_built("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally

Reviewer: If you're doing `make build` already, you might as well just collapse these two steps by saying "Run `make release`"

> - [ ] Run reverse dependency checks

Reviewer 2: Why don't we do this later, after we've picked the additional commits across, just in case some weird thing (or a cheeky last minute addition that we've added to the CRAN release) has an impact?

Reviewer: I thought we tried before and it was not feasible to do revdep checks in crossbow

Wait for the official release...
  
- [ ] Release vote passed!

> - [ ] Create a CRAN-release branch from the official release commit

Reviewer: I would do this at RC time--the commit doesn't change just because the vote passes. That way, all of those checks you're describing below you can do while the vote is open--that's your manual release verification.

- [ ] Pick any commits that were made to master since the release commit that
  were needed to fix CRAN-related submission issues (e.g., fixed URLs, fixes
  to )
- [ ] Remove badges from README.md
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory

> - [ ] Bump the Version in DESCRIPTION to X.X.X

Reviewer: This is done by the release script for you.

```suggestion
```

- [ ] Create a PR entitled `WIP: [R] Verify CRAN release-10.0.1-rc0`. Add
  a comment `@github-actions crossbow submit --group r` to run all R crossbow
  jobs against the CRAN-specific release branch.
- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz (i.e., `make build`)

> Update autobrew and r-windows PRs to use the *release* instead of the

Reviewer: I would note that lately Jeroen has been merging these PRs before the vote closes so that we can test. So this may require new PRs. 

Also you can make all of the version bumps in the autobrew formulae in the initial PR now, no need to follow up here. It uses the RC URL as "mirror", so before the vote passes, the release URL will 404 and it falls back to the RC. After, it uses the official release. So it's only the rtools-packages one that needs switching.

*release candidate*; ensure linux binary packages are available:

- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow-static autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/scripts
- [ ] PR into r-windows/rtools-packages
- [ ] Ensure linux binaries are available in the artifactory:
  https://apache.jfrog.io/ui/repos/tree/General/arrow/r

Check binary Arrow C++ distributions specific to the R package:

- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx)
  and confirm that the check is clean
- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [MacBuilder](https://mac.r-project.org/macbuilder/submit.html)
  and confirm that the check is clean
- [ ] Check `install.packages("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` on Ubuntu and ensure that the
  hosted binaries are used
- [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally one more time (for luck)

Submit!

- [ ] Upload arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz to the
  [CRAN submit page](https://xmpalantir.wu.ac.at/cransubmit/)
- [ ] Confirm the submission email

Wait for CRAN...

- [ ] Accepted!

> - [ ] Tag the tip of the CRAN-specific release branch

Reviewer: Tag how? This isn't something we've done before

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I've created a branch on my fork called r-10.0.1, but we should probably do something more robust.

Reviewer 2: @paleolimbot Any thoughts on this?

> - [ ] `usethis::use_dev_version()`

Reviewer: Also not needed, the release scripts do this.
```suggestion
```

  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Packaging checklist for CRAN release

For a high-level overview of the release process see the
[Apache Arrow Release Management Guide](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/developers/release.html#post-release-tasks).

Before the release candidate is cut:

- [ ] [Create a GitHub issue](https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/new/)
  entitled `[R] CRAN packaging checklist for version X.X.X`
  and copy this checklist to the issue.
- [ ] Evaluate the status of any failing

>   [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org). These checks
>   replicate most of the checks that CRAN runs, so we need them all to be passing
>   or to understand that the failures will not result in a rejection from CRAN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [nightly tests and nightly packaging builds](https://lists.apache.org/list.html?builds@arrow.apache.org). These checks
  replicate most of the checks that CRAN runs, so we need them all to be passing
  or to understand that the failures may (though won't necessarily) result in a rejection from CRAN.
```
Is this still correct or have I changed the meaning you intended here?

- [ ] Check [current CRAN check results](https://cran.rstudio.org/web/checks/check_results_arrow.html)
- [ ] Ensure the contents of the README is accurate
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory at the release candidate
  commit. Ignore any errors with badges as they will be removed in the CRAN release branch.

> - [ ] [Polish NEWS](https://style.tidyverse.org/news.html#news-release)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] [Polish NEWS](https://style.tidyverse.org/news.html#news-release) but do **not** update version numbers (this is done automatically later).
```

> - [ ] Prepare tweet thread highlighting new features

Reviewer 2: Do we do this for all releases or just major releases?

Wait for the release candidate to be cut:

- [ ] Release candidate!

Make pull requests into the [autobrew](https://github.com/autobrew) and
[rtools-packages](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages) repositories
used by the configure script on MacOS and Windows. These pull requests will
use the release candidate as the source.

- [ ] Pull request to modify 
  [the apache-arrow autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow.rb) 

>   to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the

Reviewer 2: Where do I get the SHA?

Reviewer 2: Same question applies ;)

Reviewer 2: If I google "how to get the SHA of a file", different results refer to SHA1 and SHA256; this bit needs explicit instructions as it's unclear as it is.

Reviewer 2: Oh wait, it's SHA256, cool

>   to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to update the release version, SHA256 checksum of the release source file, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
```

  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify

>   [the apache-arrow-static autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow-static.rb)

Reviewer 2: I get a 404 for this URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [the apache-arrow-static autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-cran/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow-static.rb)
```

  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify the 
  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Pull request to modify the
  [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
  to reflect changes in
  [ci/PKGBUILD](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/ci/scripts/PKGBUILD),
  uncommenting the line that says "uncomment to test the rc".

Prepare and check the .tar.gz that will be released to CRAN.

> - [ ] `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rcXX`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] `git fetch upstream && git checkout release-X.X.X-rcXX && git clean -f -d`
```
Added a `git clean` to delete any untracked local files and directories.

> - [ ] `make build` (copies Arrow C++ into tools/cpp, prunes some unnecessary
>   components, and runs `R CMD build`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Unset the `ARROW_HOME` environment variable and then run `make build` (copies Arrow C++ into tools/cpp, prunes some unnecessary components, and runs `R CMD build`)
```

> - [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally

Reviewer 2: Can you run `devtools::check()` on a `.tar.gz` file?  I get:

```
Error: '/home/nic2/arrow/r/arrow_10.0.1.tar.gz' is not a directory.
```

- [ ] Run reverse dependency checks

Wait for the official release...
  
- [ ] Release vote passed!
- [ ] Create a CRAN-release branch from the official release commit
- [ ] Pick any commits that were made to master since the release commit that
  were needed to fix CRAN-related submission issues (e.g., fixed URLs, fixes
  to )
- [ ] Remove badges from README.md
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory
- [ ] Bump the Version in DESCRIPTION to X.X.X
- [ ] Create a PR entitled `WIP: [R] Verify CRAN release-10.0.1-rc0`. Add
  a comment `@github-actions crossbow submit --group r` to run all R crossbow

>   jobs against the CRAN-specific release branch.

Reviewer 2: This is great, much more clear, thanks!

Reviewer 2: Actually, wait, what branches are we comparing on the PR? Does it even matter? I made an arbitrary one which branched off the release candidate and made a whitespace change. Should we recommend that here?

- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz (i.e., `make build`)

Update autobrew and r-windows PRs to use the *release* instead of the
*release candidate*; ensure linux binary packages are available:

> - [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core
> - [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow-static autobrew formula)
```

Added extra words to disambuguate identical options

- [ ] Pull request to modify
  [the apache-arrow autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/high-sierra/Formula/apache-arrow.rb) 
  to update the release version, SHA256 checksum of the release source file, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify
  [the apache-arrow-static autobrew formula]( https://github.com/autobrew/homebrew-core/blob/master/Formula/apache-arrow-static.rb)
  to update the version, SHA, and any changes to dependencies and build steps that have changed in the
  [copy of the formula we have of that formula in the Arrow repo](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow-static.rb)
- [ ] Pull request to modify the 
  [autobrew script](https://github.com/autobrew/scripts/blob/master/apache-arrow)
  to include any additions made to
  [r/tools/autobrew](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/r/tools/autobrew).
- [ ] Pull request to modify the

>   [PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [RTools PKGBUILD script](https://github.com/r-windows/rtools-packages/blob/master/mingw-w64-arrow/PKGBUILD)
```

  on that commit.
- [ ] Pick any commits that were made to master since the release commit that
  were needed to fix CRAN-related submission issues identified in the above
  steps.
- [ ] Remove badges from README.md
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory
- [ ] Create a PR entitled `WIP: [R] Verify CRAN release-10.0.1-rc0`. Add
  a comment `@github-actions crossbow submit --group r` to run all R crossbow
  jobs against the CRAN-specific release branch.
- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz (i.e., `make build`)

Create new autobrew and r-windows PRs such that they use the *release*
instead of the *release candidate*; ensure linux binary packages are available:

- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow-static autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/scripts
- [ ] PR into r-windows/rtools-packages
- [ ] Ensure linux binaries are available in the artifactory:
  https://apache.jfrog.io/ui/repos/tree/General/arrow/r

Check binary Arrow C++ distributions specific to the R package:

- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx)

>   and confirm that the check is clean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean
```

> - [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx)
>   and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx) (r-devel only)
  and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean
```

> - [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx) (r-devel only)
>   and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx) (r-devel only)
  and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean.
  This step cannot be completed before Jeroen has put the binaries in the MinGW repository.
```

- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [MacBuilder](https://mac.r-project.org/macbuilder/submit.html)
  and confirm that the check is clean
- [ ] Check `install.packages("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` on Ubuntu and ensure that the
  hosted binaries are used

> - [ ] `devtools::check("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally one more time (for luck)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] `devtools::check_built("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally one more time (for luck)
```

  were needed to fix CRAN-related submission issues identified in the above
  steps.
- [ ] Remove badges from README.md
- [ ] Run `urlchecker::url_check()` on the R directory
- [ ] Create a PR entitled `WIP: [R] Verify CRAN release-10.0.1-rc0`. Add
  a comment `@github-actions crossbow submit --group r` to run all R crossbow
  jobs against the CRAN-specific release branch.
- [ ] Regenerate arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz (i.e., `make build`)

Create new autobrew and r-windows PRs such that they use the *release*
instead of the *release candidate*; ensure linux binary packages are available:

- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/homebrew-core (apache-arrow-static autobrew formula)
- [ ] PR into autobrew/scripts
- [ ] PR into r-windows/rtools-packages
- [ ] Ensure linux binaries are available in the artifactory:
  https://apache.jfrog.io/ui/repos/tree/General/arrow/r

Check binary Arrow C++ distributions specific to the R package:

- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [win-builder](https://win-builder.r-project.org/upload.aspx) (r-devel only)
  and confirm (with Neal, who will automatically receive an email about the results) that the check is clean.

>   This step cannot be completed before Jeroen has put the binaries in the MinGW repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This step cannot be completed before Jeroen has put the binaries in the MinGW repository, i.e. [here](https://ftp.opencpu.org/rtools/ucrt64/), [here](https://ftp.opencpu.org/rtools/mingw64/), and [here](https://ftp.opencpu.org/rtools/mingw32/).
```

- [ ] Upload the .tar.gz to [MacBuilder](https://mac.r-project.org/macbuilder/submit.html)
  and confirm that the check is clean
- [ ] Check `install.packages("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` on Ubuntu and ensure that the
  hosted binaries are used
- [ ] `devtools::check_built("arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz")` locally one more time (for luck)

Submit!

- [ ] Upload arrow_X.X.X.tar.gz to the
  [CRAN submit page](https://xmpalantir.wu.ac.at/cransubmit/)
- [ ] Confirm the submission email

Wait for CRAN...

- [ ] Accepted!
- [ ] Tag the tip of the CRAN-specific release branch

> - [ ] Add a new line to the matrix in the [backwards compatability job](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/r/github.linux.arrow.version.back.compat.yml)

Reviewer 2: Is this only for major release?

> - [ ] Add a new line to the matrix in the [backwards compatability job](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/r/github.linux.arrow.version.back.compat.yml)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [ ] Add a new line to the matrix in the [backwards compatability job](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/r/github.linux.arrow.version.back.compat.yml)
```
```suggestion
- [ ] Add a new line to the matrix in the [backwards compatability job](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/dev/tasks/r/github.linux.arrow.version.back.compat.yml)
- [ ] (patch releases only) Update the package version in `ci/scripts/PKGBUILD`, `dev/tasks/homebrew-formulae/autobrew/apache-arrow.rb`, `r/DESCRIPTION`, and `r/NEWS.md`
```
